---
layout: post
title: Pushkinskaya
---

St. Petersburg, winter 2010, and I am on my way by train from Zurich to Shanghai, via Siberia, to visit Dad. Nikolai and I were touring the metro stations of St. Petersburg. The metro stations are deep underground, because of the soil and because they were built as bomb shelters. Stalin ordered them to be beautiful, as with all public spaces, and each one was designed by a famous architect under a grand and noble theme: the cosmonauts, agriculture, the Great Patriotic War, etc. Nikolai’s favourite is Pushkinskaya, dedicated to the poet Pushkin. White arches in the classical style, supported by brown marble columns, and a statue of Pushkin at one end, seated. There is a fresh rose on his lap, and Nikolai tells me someone replaces it every week. At the entrance elevator a very bored security guard in a crumpled, heavy uniform, sits in his cubby box staring at a tiny black and white TV screen. One still used coin tokens to enter through the turnstiles.

Weeks later, Dad and I are strolling through the tree-lined streets of the French concession in Shanghai. He is telling me about growing up here during the years of the disastrous “Great Leap Forward” (1958-1961), when people were starving and eating leather shoes and newspapers. Dad was one of seven children, who used to try and steal a bit of salt or sugar, just for the taste. To settle them down, my Grandmother would sit the children down and tell stories, and the one everyone wanted to hear was by Pushkin, the tale of “The Fisherman and the Fish”.

In it, an old, poor fisherman cast his net and caught a golden fish who could talk and who granted him a wish. The humble fisherman couldn’t think of anything and simply let it go. When he told this to his wife after returning home, the greedy wife told him immediately to go back and ask for a trough to replace their broken one. The fish happily agreed and when the wife heard this she went again into a rage, and told him to go back and ask for a house. Once again this was granted but the greedy wife wasn’t satisfied, and proceeded to ask to be a noble lady, to be ruler of her province, to have a castle, to be ruler of the seas and therefore have the golden fish as her subject. As the requests became grander the seas became stormier, and finally to cure her of her greed the golden fish returned her to her farm with the broken trough.

Years later, during the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976), the country was in turmoil, and the people were up in arms against all “culture”. Professors and intellectuals were imprisoned, books were burned, artifacts and relics were destroyed, school was cancelled and the students sent to the countryside as labour. The fight was against capitalism and the bourgeoisie and to preserve the “true” communist ideology and purge the country of dissidents and revisionists, and of course for Mao to regain the power he thought was slipping from him. It set the country back decades.

“Many of the historical sites and statues around here were destroyed,” says Dad. It is late evening and we are still within the French concession, strolling through the quiet, neighbourly streets. All the foreign statues and inscriptions here were smashed and defaced. Only one survived. A bust of Pushkin, in memory of that famous poet, originally erected by the White Russians between the wars. We were standing in front of it under the orange sodium lights, as Dad finished his story, first told to him by my Grandmother.

&nbsp
---
&nbsp
  
Dad tells me that the great Tang dynasty poet Li Bai, whose name means “white”, was born at Lake Baikal, in Siberia, far outside the borders of the empire (I later found out this wasn’t true, but it is so memorable that “white” was born in the snows of Baikal). Many years after I traveled throughout Africa and discovered that Pushkin’s grandfather had been a slave, brought from Ethiopia, and that the only memorial in all of Africa dedicated to Pushkin was in Addis Ababa...
